when you think of a volcano what's the
first thing that comes to mind
streams of red steaming hot lava pouring
over the sides
dark clouds of ash rising high into the
sky
maybe you think of a relaxing hot spring
ah
that's nice well we all imagine one
thing
a cone-shaped mountain looming over the
horizon
but it can be as green and lush as any
other mountain
at the top of course there's a giant
hole like an
opening that goes all the way down
inside there's lava and gas is being
pushed outside
lava is so hot that if you were standing
at the top of the volcano and looked
down
your face would feel as red as the color
of that liquid rock oozing out
a volcanic eruption never comes without
consequences for us
and i'm not just talking about people
living nearby
the impacts are usually felt on a global
scale
too can't fly for a while because of the
blanket of ash released in the air
not to mention it might be a bit tricky
to breathe
carbon dioxide sulfur dioxide and plenty
of other toxic gases whose names
immediately take you back to your high
school chemistry class
funny enough most of that cloud rising
out of a volcano
is just water well vaporized from those
scalding temperatures
but before any volcano erupts it goes
through stages like an angsty teen
first magma that's lava before it erupts
onto the surface and gets its name
change
starts moving underneath the volcano
this causes earthquakes that get worse
and more dangerous over time
then steam and different gases start
spewing out of holes in the planet's
crust
our earth resembles a tea kettle about
to whistle
when the gas emissions and earthquakes
get more massive
it usually means the volcano is about to
blow its top
but those first stages can take years
before an eruption happens
then the magma starts building up with
more and more pressure
it's planning to make its great escape
it's hard to notice this happening if
you don't have the proper equipment
good things scientists do and they've
got us covered
the volcano becomes more active by the
minute ash starts coming out and
spreading in the air
creating ominous clouds that turn day to
night
with the magma building up an eruption
is imminent
then boom the surface gives in
under the pressure below the magma makes
its exit
it's now lava spewing out the top and
flowing down the sides of the mountain
none of this sounds very appealing so
what if it
never happened what if there were never
any volcanoes at all
would earth still be the same not at all
if volcanoes never existed there
wouldn't be an atmosphere
when our planet was still just a young
pup volcanic gases
are what created our protective bubble
that allows you and me to breathe right
now
they also played a big part in shaping
the land and oceans
four billion years ago earth was still
forming
it didn't look anything like the pale
blue dot we know today
it was red hot and the water was trapped
under the crust
it wasn't until the surface started to
cool down and solidify
that the water was finally able to
escape
volcanoes acted sort of like a tear in
the fabric of our planet
water vapor would condense in the
atmosphere and then fall back down as
rain
it rained for so long that the third
planet from the sun
started turning into the blue ball we're
more familiar with
in fact there's even a theory that all
the water on earth
came from volcanoes and without water of
course
life wouldn't have been able to form
land formation went through a similar
process
you see our planet was a pretty rough
place to be when it was forming
it was a molten surface with fields of
lava
and constant volcanic eruptions and
space rocks always crashing into it
because there was no atmosphere to
protect it
when it started cooling down a good
solid surface
formed but the hot material underneath
was still
boiling and bubbling and it continued
making its way up
the crust would move and form thick
layers with the material that was rising
up
over time these layers became more
permanent
volcanic eruptions were still happening
but the first landmass had finally
formed
okay we'll take the best part of
volcanoes an
atmosphere so what if they stopped
erupting
long after we got our protective
breathable shield still
not good for starters volcanoes created
the most
fertile soil around naples you have the
famous
mount vesuvius the soil quality there is
incredibly rich
and that's thanks to two huge volcanic
eruptions
one that happened 35 000 years ago and
another
12 000 years ago
sure these volcanoes caused a lot of
short-term damage
but in the long run these soils were
fertilized by them
now the region grows all kinds of citrus
fruits olives
grapes cherries and of course their
staple
tomatoes there'd be none of that without
rich volcanic soil
and naples is by far not the only
example like this
bacteria the first living organisms
lived in hot water
scientists have discovered fossilized
microorganisms
older than 4 billion years they thrived
in hydrothermal vents
those are fissures on the sea floor and
they're usually near
volcanically active places this means
that without volcanoes we wouldn't have
land water
or even the first life forms that as the
theory goes
would eventually evolve into all the
creatures we have today
could life have still developed on earth
without these explosive mountains
uh doubtful okay fair enough we want our
atmosphere
and life so let's say volcanoes stopped
erupting today
after we already have all these benefits
well
we're sort of already there based on
this story
at the start there was only one
continent pangaea
it was a super continent surrounded by
one massive continuous super ocean
volcanic activity by this time had
finally calmed down
and this meant all that energy would
gather below the earth's crust
here's a little diagram first we have
the earth's inner core
then there's the outer core next up we
have our convection currents
magma is next in line after that the
oceanic crust
and at the very top we have our ocean
and our continental crust
the reason pangaea eventually broke up
into the separate continents we have
today
is because of plate tectonics it's not
like the crust is all one solid piece
it's broken up into big chunks or plates
that are always moving and it's all
still moving today
yes the land you're standing on right
now is sort of surfing
on that layer of convection currents
it's a slow process
so it's not like you can feel it pangaea
didn't break apart all at once
it took tens of millions of years when
the plates move
they cause earthquakes and volcanic
activity they create mountains too
it's good for our planet as well because
the earth gets to sort of renew its old
crust
if there was no volcanic activity now
the pressure underneath the earth's
crust would keep building up
it'd get to a boiling point the
continents couldn't handle anymore
and eventually they'd start splitting
into more numerous
and smaller masses volcanoes are still
useful to us till this day
for one they cool our atmosphere their
eruptions release sulfur gas
it combines with water in our atmosphere
and cools it
at its lowest level which is where we
live and breathe
there's also an excellent use for their
heat geothermal power plants
harness the energy coming from deep
inside the earth and turn its heat into
steam
we then use that steam and turn it into
electricity
this is the case for our friends in new
zealand and iceland
since they live in places with high
underground temperatures
volcanic material can also be made into
blocks for building stuff
it can be grounded down to make cement
too
if we want we can even search volcanoes
for precious minerals like gold
copper and sulfur
and who can forget about hot springs
tourism to places like yellowstone and
iceland
wouldn't be the same without them and
who doesn't love a nice steamy dip
in the ones safe for swimming oh yeah
in the end volcanoes aren't so bad after
all
our beautiful earth wouldn't be what it
is without them